11.36 a.m.
Line 1.
Nick, good morning.
This is Leon Monstein, and I'm replying to your letter of April 11th.
Sorry, I've been away and didn't get to it sooner.
But it's correct to deduct the whole $10,000 as your investment in Hanson technology.
The business is no longer in business, and that you did contribute $10,000 in stock to that.
And you can't deduct $3,000 off.
three and a half years until you used up that loss.
I'm trying to look for some old stationery so I can write you to this effect.
And as soon as I find it, I will write you a letter on this.
Thank you for everything and my regards to Connie, etc.
Mary says her best.
Thank you.
If you have any questions, you can call me at Nero at 852-5553 or call me at home at night at
892-4648.
And I'd be happy to answer any questions.
But meanwhile, we're going to be stationary so that we can tell you you can defect the entire amount of the $10,000 investment you made in Hanson technology.
Thank you.
Bye.
Tuesday, 12, 34 p.m., line one.
Nick, it's Alex Johnson, the author of A Hidden Writer, and you did the most wonderful, wonderful piece.
My editor, I loved it.
My editor really loved it because it kept popping up all over the United States.
So I thank you.
After we did our interview, I went on a pretty long book tour and then was away for all of August, getting back just around Labor Day.
So I'm just returning your call.
We would love to see you.
Hi, this is Nick.
It's 10 a.m.
on January 22, 1998.
I'm on my way to New York City for some book-related matters, listening to the New York Times Jazz Station, home of popular standards.
And...
Thought it might be a good time to just record a few thoughts on the work in progress, which we have tentatively titled Life Beyond Life, colon, book people, book places, book culture, comma, at the dawn of a new millennium.
Or it could be at the dawn of a new era.
Or it could be on the eve of a new millennium.
We'll have to see.
In any case, I have started to write the book.
I have about 10,000 words.
Not necessarily all clean, finished, polished words, but words nonetheless.
And I'm hopeful that if I can keep up this pace, I can get the manuscript turned in, submitted by the end of this year.
I hope perhaps even by October, but...
With some luck, it'll be November.
In which case, we will see the book published in 1998.
In the case, that was a pretty difficult turn there, folks.
Getting from 84 to 684, and I almost missed the turn.
I was writing last night.
working on the tentative outline, very rough outline of how these chapters might go.
So we know already that we have a prologue that begins with Otto Bettman playing a Bach piece for Connie and me.
in his apartment in Florida.
And why Otto Bettman?
Of course, because he is someone who touches every decade of the 20th century.
He was born in 1903.
And here we are, two years from the year 2000.
And he's still alive and he's still thinking.
And what was he?
He was at one time a rare books librarian.
in Germany.
He's Jewish.
He had to leave the country when Hitler took over in 1933.
He had hoped at one point to be a publisher.
So we have a librarian, a prospective publisher who did his PhD thesis on the German book trade prior to World War I.
And what he did, of course, he came here with a Leica camera and a trunk full of photographs that he had made.
He had begun making one when he was in Germany.
And this enterprise became known as the Betman Archive, which was sold for many millions of dollars in the 1990s to Corpus, which is 100% owned by Bill Gates.
I interviewed Otto over a two-day period in 1996.
And he talked about books.
He talked about images.
He talked about the future.
He talked about being an immigrant.
And then when he played the organ for us, and it was a Bach piece, and I said to him, why Bach?
And he said,
Because Bach always comes back to where he began.
We are going to have a chapter, possibly even two chapters, called Continuum.
Continuum 1, Continuum 2.
Or we will have two sections about Continuum 1, Continuum 2.
I don't know.
We'll have to see how this plays.
We'll have to see how this plays in the lighting.
But I have Otto playing the Bach piece.
And then I will, in the prologue, and I will say a little bit about it, perhaps even four or five hundred words, and I will conclude that opening segment of Otto talking about the continuum.
Also in the prologue, I will deal with my little anecdote from the Boston Athenaeum, the story I've told several times, many times in my
and my addresses to various library groups.
How as I was working feverishly to get the galleys and the gentle madness corrected, going back to New York and to get the book on track so we could get it published in time.
I took out some books from the Athenaeum, which are 84 years old, the catalogs to the Peace Library.
And I noticed as I was signing them out, the Athenaeum at that time, and in fact even today, still signs out books.
I was able to determine that I was the first person in 84 years who had ever taken out these books.
And as I was checking them out, I said, my goodness, you wonder who they bought these books for in the first place?
And the man whose name I have to get, the gray-haired man, said to me, Wyatt, we bought them for you, sir.
There's, you know, a statement that I came.
That would end the prologue.
We bought them for you, sir.
Then, from there, we would go directly into what we have tentatively titled as Continuum One.
And I will start...
on the hill in Pergamum in Asia Minor.
There to absorb the ambiance of this ancient Greek library.
This is a place.
And we will talk a little bit about this while we're there.
And then we will sweep from Pergamum, perhaps over to the island of Patmos, where there is a library that continues to function.
And from Patmos, maybe over to
Mount Athos.
This is really a medieval community.
They are book people, it is a book place, and it is book culture.
All at one site, all at one richly medieval exotic site.
And working into this part most section, this will be, I suspect, the major thrust of attention in this opening chapter.
Mount Athos.
And there we can use the Robert Curzon Travels to the Levant.
Record how when he was touring this part of the world in the 1830s, Lord Elgin at that same time was taking the marbles of the Acropolis, the Parthenon marbles from the Acropolis in Athens to England, which are the subject today.
Very, very, very much.
controversy and speculation.
But he was getting manuscripts, and many, many of those manuscripts are now in the British Museum, British Library.
So anyway, we used some of the quotes of Corazon.
Maybe his observations intersposed them with mine.
I think this will be a very wonderful segment of this opening chapter.
And those first three places will more or less set the scene for the Continuum One chapter.
I haven't yet decided how I'll move from there, but I suspect from Mount Athos and Patmos, both of which are on hills, we'll go directly to Monte Cassino, also on a hill, where
the rule of Benedict was formulated where I went into this room.
Make the point, Nick, that this abbey was virtually destroyed by Allied aircraft in World War II.
And yet the book survived.
The rules certainly survived.
This cell, the room where Benedict formulated this rule, survived.
Books survive.
Places are destroyed.
And so again, it's a question of the ambiance and the importance of why we go to Monte Cassino.
We actually see books there that were made there.
And the books survive.
You might want to intersperse here the brief point.
It recalls how this recalls
The observation of Dr. Hennepad-Benz at the Gutenberg Museum at Lines, how none of Gutenberg's title has survived, none of his office records, not his press.
All that we have, she said, is the book.
But of course, what were they doing?
It was the book.
Okay, so from Monte Cassino, I think we'll shoot up to St.
Gall.
It's not the original library.
We don't have an original cloister there, but it's very important, isn't it?
Because that is where St.
Columba came.
And we will talk about Columba.
We will develop him as a personality.
And we will explain the significance of the rule, of the plan of the Abbey at St.
Gaul, which was a model
Abbey, which was put into effect for the making of scriptoria around Europe and for the preservation and transmission of knowledge.
From St.
Gaul, I think I'll shoot over to England, Durham Cathedral.
We're still in our continuum phase.
There are cloisters there, beautiful cloisters, apparently.
We'll do that.
It's a cathedral library.
It is the only cathedral library, apparently, that survived Henry VIII's program of the dissolution of the monasteries, beginning in 1536.
So that's very important.
And then I think down we'll go to Hereford Chain Library, bring in the fittings, the study of libraries, a wonderful book that you have.
We want to talk about fittings.
And then I guess we'll go back to Italy, to this nice big sweeping segment that I plan on the Italian libraries, like this string of pearls that stretches across the top of Italy.
the Ambrosiana, the Capicillare, the Libreria di Malatestina in Chechnya, the Biblioteca Menecea Lorenziana in Florence.
I think you have four exquisite libraries.
And I think the idea here is to write about Italy as a nation of libraries, diverse libraries, the rich, the rich, pulsing cultural heritage that you find that these libraries represent.
You know, certainly we have the Pope and religion, and what did we learn when we were at the Ambosiana?
That there are more than a thousand, one thousand, ecclesiastic libraries accounting for the number I believe is 27 million books in Italy.
And this does not count, this does not include the Vatican Library.
which quite technically is not Italy, it's Vatican City, and it is an ecclesiastic library, but it's the library of the Vatican, of the Catholic Church.
And then you have six or so national libraries in Italy.
We only have one in the United States.
Why do they have six?
Because Italy has only been a nation for about 125 years.
And so you have that spread out.
Then you have some interesting university libraries.
And of course these individual libraries that have survived really are quite unique.
And so that's Italia.
We finish Italia.
And then we'll go to Spain.
And we'll do the Biblioteca Colabina.
Christopher Columbus's son founded it.
the first library in Europe, apparently, to have been built with American money.
And also you wish to make the point that the history of America, at least so far as Europeans are concerned, the European history of America, is bracketed by the history of print.
Columbus, we must recall, his father, announced his discovery in the form of a letter that was printed.
To say all this, the history of North America is bracketed by printing.
It has been an ongoing history that has not only been documented, but printed.
And some of that, a slice of that, is at this library and also over at the Archive of the Indians.
I think at this point, we've kind of done
the front part of Continuum One.
Whether we close this chapter at around this point or we shoot it over to the British Library, the new one, the new French Library, the new German Library, the new Swedish Library.
Libraries are going up all over the world right now.
Millions and millions of dollars are being spent on libraries.
So our library as repository is dead?
Well, the evidence certainly doesn't indicate that at all, does it?
We'll hold on to the epilogue of the book.
And I don't know whether or not we'll mention it in the forelog.
But certainly when we're discussing Patmos, we have to mention that how it came up as a rival to Alexandria.
And we talk about Alexandria.
And we'll mention here that really no trace of that original library remains.
Can't leave it there.
And then in the prologue, we'll return to that part of the world, and we will be on that site.
And there on that site is the brand new Alexandrian library being built, being erected.
and taking us into the 21st century.
And like Bach, and like Otto Bettman says, we return to where we started.
So we've got the prologue, we've got chapter one, we've got the epilogue.
I believe at this time, I would move immediately into the chapter on booksellers.
And as I indicated in the outline I prepared last night, booksellers we will include in this will be Pierre Perez, Carlo Alberto Chiesa, John Maggs, Nico Israel, Max Israel, Peter Howard, Bill Reese,
You need a woman, possibly Christina Juvenas.
We want to talk about the scholarly tradition of bookseller.
You've got a lot of literature at home, a lot of material.
Check the database.
Check the books that you purchased.
You want some sense of continuity, of continuum again, of the tradition of the bookseller as scholar, the bookseller learning things, the bookseller passing on.
his knowledge, her knowledge, gleaned from a bibliographical investigation into a book.
That's what the book is when it's important.
Oh, my goodness, you know, we forgot Rustenberg and Stern.
Rustenberg and Stern go in there, by all means.
Terrible attention goes in there.
Steve Weissman goes in there.
And then, I'm not sure...
whether we go from that chapter to the emigres, whether the emigres are part of this, or we start with the emigres and go to this.
I think we do this and then we'll do the emigres.
There are no survivors other than the FEMA, but we do have the recollections of Marguerite Goldschmidt,
and her husband, and the woman over in Queens on Offenbacher.
I hope at some point to talk to Mary Ann Krause about her father.
Otto Bettman works in here again, even though he wasn't a bookseller.
He's from the tradition.
We have Steve Schuler's Harvard PhD thesis, where he
has information on Walter Johnson and Schatzky and Helen Wolfe, the immigrate publishers.
So, in the aspect of the immigrates, it will not be focused strictly on the books.
Oh, I forgot Barney Rosenthal and I forgot Fred Schreiber.
Bonnie Rosenthal and Fred Scheiber are booksellers who have to be in these front two chapters and in Bonnie's history.
Bonnie's history is very important.
The Israel history is very important.
The Crow's history is very important.
In each of those cases, we have generational booksellers.
probably booksellers and then lost the burgers during the year too and everybody loved that story and that could pretty much come out of what we did for biblio so that's done all right that's three chapters from this one i'd kind of like to go to
I think we have good materials at this point.
Good, exciting, engaging, anecdotal material.
A lot of narrative possibilities here.
Let's go straight to the office.
Reading.
Start with reading.
Go to the office.
Umberto Eco.
Ella Bloom.
Stephen J. Gould, Timmy Olson.
Robert Coles.
We've got to put Robert Coles.
Where do we put Robert Coles?
Stories that you can live your life on and children.
That reading study from Boston where books have been prescribed.
And you know that little segment I wrote last night about Stephen Cusisto?
where reading was dangerous to his health?
How about pairing that immediately, immediately with that story out of Boston on books being prescribed as medicine?
You know?
Books dangerous, physically?
How about books therapeutic, medically?
I would pair those two stories together.
Two stories that broke within weeks of each other.
literally within weeks of each other in January of 1998.
All right, let's use that device.
Let's use that device.
In January of 1998, within weeks of each other, two seemingly disparate cultural stories, one in the form of a book, the other in form of an article in the New York Times,
raise the issue of books, of reading, of reading.
And the concept is, are they hazardous to your health on the one hand?
And do they help you grow or nurture you on the other?
That's really, I like that a lot.
That sounds really, really good.
Let's use that in the reading, and then we'll get into
Echo, don't forget now you haven't written yet the Jean-Paul Sartre segment on reading.
We haven't done the Virginia Woolf yet.
You have to do that.
Stephen Jay Gould, you have one transcript for him.
I recommend you transcribe that other tape pretty quickly.
So now we've got four chapters plus a co-log.
We've got the co-log, we've got the continual one,
And we've got the two bookseller segments, one including the emigres, the other based on the Europeans, and now we get into reading.
So that's four.
Reading, again, very anecdotal.
So, in the first four chapters, we've established a continuum, we've established the places, book places and libraries.
We have a number of book people.
And book culture is evident by everything that we've described.
Of course, reading.
Be alert to all the great quotes that you've picked up in your LFS interviews about reading.
You know, when they came to me last night, I certainly don't want to forget it.
Andre Brink, who was banned in his own country,
which describes what it's like to be a writer without a country.
A writer without a country.
A writer without a reader.
And thus it came to pass that he wrote all of his books himself in two languages.
He does not consider this translation.
He considers this two separate works of the literary imagination, each of which that he has done.
And there are textures that he does differently.
Contrast that with what Peter Carey told you about being an Australian writer who lives in America.
And who does he write for?
What, the reader here in America?
Or the reader that matters?
The reader that matters is the one in Australia.
So that's good.
That's really good.
We've got those two there.
I really definitely think they work together.
But the writer and his reader, Carey's quote,
The canon, it is ultimately the reader, not the critic, creates the canon.
I like that quote a lot.
And Robert Coles, as I said, goes in the writer's chapter.
I would also put Robert Fagles in there.
There's got Helen Vendler.
You know, we have some vague overlap here between these writers, between the reader, and between the canon discussion, the literary canon.
You know, I think we'll go with what we have.
We'll summarize what's going on.
The concept of text.
You can bring in here that LexisNexis item that you found, where they are outsourcing the selection of books for their libraries.
or they are doing research to determine the core collection of fiction for a public library.
You know, detail, this is all detail that you want to get.
Again, pay attention, look at your database.
So I think we've got about five chapters here.
But,
sequences, everything.
So from the reader, let's go straight to Harvard, the Harvard Cornell chapter.
Harvard Cornell with strong backup support from Berkeley, Stanford, Virginia, Michigan, Illinois, Brown,
You were at Dartmouth, Columbia, Utah.
Minor Myers.
That new university down there in Florida that was just opened in 1997.
They outsourced the formation of a library.
You know about the new California College of Monterey that was going to build its place without even having a building for books.
We've got that man in San Diego who has worked at stock libraries with books.
The whole idea of books, how do they matter?
Do numbers matter?
The Harvard Depository kind of gets to this, the last copy policy.
And so we'll go from that.
Let's go to the San Francisco Public Library story.
This does bring up the question now of technology, doesn't it?
So next we'll do San Francisco Public Library and Technology, and that's the case study.
I can bring in here other public libraries, New York, certainly.
The town of Parker, both culture, a good place.
You'd have to mention Boston.
Maybe you'll go to a couple of new public libraries.
You've got one in Fort Lauderdale.
You've got one in San Antonio.
I mean, you'll visit these things, but you certainly want to mention them, and you certainly want to know about them and include them in there.
From here, we'll go to, um, from specific to general.
Try and balance this specific to general, specific to general.
Now, wherever we put Lloyd Colson,
I think he has to follow very closely to the colleges.
So after the colleges, let's go to Post.
After the Harvard, Cornell, et cetera chapter, let's go to Lloyd Coates.
And these are the
Chapters that I envision being a lot like the Texas A.M.O.
Moore.
I have a number of chapters in Gentle Madness where they are very focused.
They're not episodic.
They're also thinking, which has not been researched yet, but a book arts chapter.
Be sure to include Terry Belanger in the book arts press in Risky, Virginia with this.
And I would start this chapter with Joe Jacobson at the MIT Media Lab.
The MIT Media Lab is showing me an electronic book that looks like a book, has pages like a book, but can load up to 3,000 books.
That's a book.
That's very interesting.
It presages the future, but it also allows us to then go off and write about.
I think prior to the writing of this, we'll do bibliography.
We're going to do an interview with Tom Tantel and Alice Schreier.
We have Father Boyle.
We have Art B. Hanneman.
We have Carol Fitzgerald, who basically has written.
We've got Owen Newbridge of the Aquinas Project.
Don't forget to mention the project of the Mass Historical Society on the Adams papers.
Tom Tanzel will tell you the bibliographic projects.
We've got Tom Staley of the University of Texas, Austin, the HRC.
He's got the story there on
I think D.H.
Lawrence, Ulysses, that are there.
Could they do a headwind collated type of project with that book?
You know, we have to get into deaccessioning.
Now, either we do deaccessioning with San Francisco and Harvard.
Yeah, it would work, doesn't it?
We got David Stamm.
I think David Stamm will come in
in the Harvard Cornell.
And when we're discussing the New York and San Francisco Public Library, that's where you bring in Paula Clare.
Paula Clare comes in.
That's where Padme comes in, too.
But the deaccessioning question and the preservation question comes in again.
But the real issues of
over accessioning and preservation, really preservation, is to be picked up in the National Libraries.
And we will do that with L.C.
We got good quotes there.
We have good quotes from the British Library.
We have good quotes from the French Library.
We have excellent on-site from
We might even want to start in Bucherei, Leipzig, in this whole preservation discussion.
So I've done the readers, I've done canon, heritage, culture, and I don't know what chapter will be the concluding chapter yet.
Something strong, something good, better than Nick Manning, certainly.
Maybe the National Libraries' Repositories of Culture and History, because it says Continuum, too.
It's a continuum.
It's a really focus on the heritage of the National Libraries.
So that will be your concluding chapter.
And then it will allow us to segue you neatly into an epilogue, and the epilogue will be at Alexandria and the New Library.
So there I think you have ten very strong, integrated, interrelated
Chapters.
And we don't mean to forget anything.
I would suggest check your calendar from last year, see who you interviewed, LFS as well as LBL.
And write them all down on your outline.
As fragmentary as it is.
Okay, I just got onto the hutch.
And this has been a good conversation, and now I'm going to go take a leap.
Thanks.
One thing I want to add, I'm back on the road again.
I don't believe I mentioned Toronto and the Fisher Rare Books Library, but how the University of Toronto serves as a de facto national library in Canada.
It really is not a national library, per se.
There is a National Archives, but there's a national library.
The University of Toronto, and I do believe the University of Vancouver, but we'll have to check that out, or British Columbia or something out there on the West Coast works.
There's another kind of national library, but there are two major depository libraries for books in Canada.
I also want to mention, you know, I never even got into the last one about the emigre libraries.
We talked about the emigres who came here.
as booksellers, but I didn't mention the Emigre Library, the concept of the Emigre Library.
That's so important.
And Cornell's work with the Cambodia Archives, that could either go into digital, or it could go into Cornell, or it could go into Emigre.
I don't think it's Emigre, per se, because the Cambodians really didn't bring that stuff here with them.
It came here through other means.
The university had agents who acquired it and bought it here.
We also want to write about... I forgot to mention Sarajevo.
There's a whole other chapter, so actually now we'll have to... I've forgotten all about that.
There's Kimmel McCartney describing the destruction and the bombing of Sarajevo.
Now, could that go into the... Boy, that could go... That could go into the National Libraries.
You know, unless you come up with something else, unless we actually do ultimately go and develop a chapter on Eastern European book culture.
And I still, to this point, do not wish to preclude a trip to St.
Petersburg.
I'd love to do it, really, and to talk to some people.
But I do, I do have the Paul Magliucci, the Edward Kassanek,
in the John Simmons interviews.
You know, yeah, yeah, Sarajevo, emigre.
Destruction.
Destruction and fighting destruction.
Sarajevo, Cambodia, the Republic of Georgia, San Lorenzo in Venice, the Armenians, the Kurds desperate to find
to preserve their culture.
They have no library.
Talk to that woman in New York who did that book.
So he definitely, how could you possibly forget Sarajevo?
So you got Sarajevo.
Book stories.
Book stories as we approach the new millennium, which elucidate a boy.
So, you know, pal, you could have here 11 chapters.
And of the 11 that you've just outlined, I'm sure that you could make a 12, because it sounds to me like a lot of this material could spin off.
At the moment, I don't know how to begin the Sarajevo one.
Maybe, maybe, you know, but I want to use the image of Christine Lachman, the burning of books.
You want to really get the destruction of books
the destruction of libraries through history.
Remember the quote that Martin Gregorian told us?
The murder of memory, the destruction of memory.
Now, that could really go into the whole, we could hold that in with the national libraries, because this was a national library.
And don't forget Poland.
There was no Poland.
What did Martin Gregorian tell us?
Where was the de facto National Library of Poland?
It was in Paris, and it's still there.
And the Georgians, when they were forced out by fellow Georgian Stalin, they went to Paris and they deposited their papers at Houghton Library until there was a New Georgia.
Well, that's terrific stuff, my friend.
That's really good stuff.
So remember using all of that.
folding it into the National Library chapter.
That's good.
So, I don't like odd.
I like even.
So either it's going to be 10 chapters or a dozen chapters.
What's wrong with a dozen?
You can do it.
Gentle Madness was a 14-chapter book.
A dozen chapters are 10,000 to 15,000 words each.
You've got yourself close to a 200,000-word book, plus notes, plus bibliography, plus sign.
So don't forget your Sarajevo.
It'd be nice if you could go there on this trip, but I don't think you can.
C'est la vie.
But we'll have to get some photographs.
We've talked to the people.
And we talked to Kemmel when he was here.
You know, you could start in the morning.
Kimmel McCarsick and I are having drinks.
That legal seafood of Brooklyn, he's here.
He's trying to elicit help to rebuild his library, to rebuild his collections.
He's been to the White House with Hillary Clinton.
And they are working on, this is where you bring in OCLC, to replicate their collections.
To replicate their collections.
digitally and also to try and find copies of books or manuscripts really that people had possibly have made when they were doing research and if they could send them back to Sarajevo.
That's a very, very, very, very important chapter on a concept.
Preservation.
digitization, scanning, technology, the technology aspects, trithemius, the future of the book, the shape of the book, the culture of the book, and really the twelfth chapter I gave you, the twelfth one would be the interactive fiction.
And that doesn't have to be that long.
or that may even work in some place else.
But we've been talking to the authors.
You know, I think the interactive fiction can go in the office.
They could go in Bob Cooper, in the holodeck, in the paper.
Microchips.
Don't forget your papyrus item.
That book that you saw from the Boston Athenaeum.
Nobody knows who invented papyrus.
I've got to go over to WIS shortly to hear that news conference, but
Even after they invented papyrus, the Egyptian pharaohs still insisted on documenting their important matter in stone, carved in stone because it would last, or baked them on tablets because it would last.
And then what did that young man tell us at the Gutenberg Museum and Mines?
Frederick II insisted that all important documents
be preserved on parchment and not paper.
So we do have this resistance to technological change at every spot through history.
All right, let's leave it there for the moment.